ON THE ARCING PHENOMENA IN THE MHD CHANNEL*
V. Goldfarb, C. Pian, I. Sadovnik 
Avco Research Laboratory, Inc. 
Everett, MA 02149

ABSTRACT

Experimental and analytical studies have been 
carried out to characterize and further understand 
arcing phenomena with particular emphasis on erosion 
produced by arcs populating high-voltage (open) 
interelectrode gaps.

This paper presents a set of related studies, 
each address a specific aspect of the arcing 
phenomena. First, bench top experiments were 
conducted to examine arcing behavior in a magnetic 
field as the arcs moved among bare and slagged 
electrodes. Direct observation of arcing in an MHD 
generator was then made on the Mark VII channel 
sidewall, and these results were correlated with 
measured voltage distributions.
Arcing erosion was measured in both the bench 
top and generator experiments for various electrode 
configurations. Erosion of copper electrodes was 
compared to erosion rates calculated from a thermal 
ablation model for stationary and/or moving arcs.
Finally, a discussion is presented on some 
specific features of the arc behavior and on 
consequences of cathodic arcing.
INTRODUCTION
The lifetime of an MHD channel is limited by 
the gradual deterioration and/or catastrophic damage 
due to arcing, primarily on the cathode wall.
Cathode wall non-uniformities can lead to axial 
breakdowns both over the high-voltage intercathode 
gaps and across the sidewall insulator gaps. The 
erosion induced by these arcs can be reduced or 
tolerated in a number of ways:
® Decrease the Hall field strength
• Generate more uniform axial voltage 
distributions
• Lower the current density or increase arc 
root mobility over electrode surfaces
• Select materials able to withstand high 
arc thermal fluxes and/or electrochemical 
erosion
• Use "sacrificial11 or renewable electrodes
Some of these methods will degrade generator 
performance or will necessitate impractical 
designs. Others have not yet been tried.
This paper, while not attempting to solve the 
arcing problem, provides additional insight into the 
multi-faceted arcing phenomena. Experimental 
observations and measurements as well as analytical 
studies will consider the following subjects:
• Anode and cathode arcing features in 
laboratory bench tests
• Voltage distributions and arc 
characteristics in an MHD generator

• Electrode erosion by stationary and moving 
arcs predicted by an analytical model
BENCH ARCING EXPERIMENTS

Bench-scale experiments were conducted to 
simulate and observe the salient features of 
interelectrode arcing even though some features, 
such as adequate combustion gas flow over the 
surface and a moving slag layer, proved difficult to 
duplicate. These experiments first investigated arc 
damage to interanode insulators, then studied arcing 
behavior on the cathode wall both with and without 
slag.
Arcing and Damage to Interanode Insulators
Interanode breakdown and subsequent arcing is 
severely damaging because the J x 8 forces drive the 
arcs into the wall and the supporting backwall. The 
electrical properties of such arcs are described in 
Refs. (1) and (2), while experimental observations 
of interanode arcing in a generator were made in 
Ref. (3). Refs. (4) and (5) confirm that interanode 
insulator damage may be reduced by changing anode 
geometry.
This experimental study focused on character­
izing interanode arcing in a magnetic field and 
reducing the possibility of damage by arc quench­
ing. The test rig shown in Figure 1 was used, where 
the insulators consisted of BN or Si3N4 , 25 mm x 
15 mm in cross-section and 1-10 mm thick, clamped 
between water-cooled copper electrodes. The arc 
current was provided by a 300 V, 40 A rectifier, and 
a water-cooled Helmholtz pair provided magnetic 
field strengths up to 1.45 T. After the arc was 
initiated with a high frequency starter, inter­
electrode arc currents and voltages were recorded 
(Figure 2). The insulators were weighed upon 
completion of the test to measure the mass of 
evaporated material. For this series of tests, the 
burn time was 4-8 sec, the arc voltage was 80-120 V, 
and the mass loss was 40-400 mg. Data from a 
typical test series is shown in Table 1. From these 
experiments, the following observations were made:
• Energy expenditure for BN arc "cutting" is 
about 1 J/mg, independent of the magnetic 
field strength. For a gap current above 
some minimum value Icr, which is a 
function of magnetic field strength, this 
energy increases with current.
• The cutting rate of BN is about 5 mm/sec 
and decreases slightly as specific arc 
power (power/gap thickness) increases.
• As the insulator thickness increases the 
specific power remains constant while the 
specific energy for ablation decreases, 
indicating that arc power is more 
efficiently utilized.
• Hot pressed silicon nitride plates were 
more easily cut by arcing than the boron 
nitride ones. Since both specific energy


and specific power were lower for 
SI3N4 , the thermal (arc) ablation 
rate for these materials does not 
correlate to erosion/corrosion resistance 
or hardness, in which Si3N4 is 
superior to BN.

To prevent propagation of an arc that has been 
driven into an insulator by the magnetic force, the 
arc must be extinguished somewhere along its 
trajectory. One possible technique may be adapted 
from magnetic blast switch technology: quenching an
arc by blowing it into a chamber where interelec­
trode spacing abruptly increases.

Experiments were performed using BN spacers, 
with an 8 mm wide cavity formed by machining the 
sides of two adjacent electrodes. Arcs were 
observed to initiate normally, but then disappear 
after reaching the edges of the cavity and cutting 
through the top of the insulator (Figure 3). The 
width itself of the cavity could not account for the 
arc quenching since the open circuit voltage was 
high enough to sustain the arc. Instead, it is 
concluded that the sudden increase in width 
extinguished the arc. It is then important to 
determine whether repeated arcing would eventually 
cut through the remaining insulation to strike the 
back board. Such a break through did occur, but 
only after repeated arc initiations (7-15) at the 
same location with high voltages and currents.
MkVII channel tests support the possibility of 
limiting the depth of arc propagation: only about 1
cm arc propagation was observed after 15 minutes 
when subjected to an externally applied 10-20 A 
interanode arc in a 2 T magnetic field.
Slagged Intercathode Arcing
The first series of intercathode bench top 
experiments studied arc breakdown in the presence of 
a molten slag layer. A seed/ash mixture was trans­
ported by argon through a gas-cooled enclosure over 
electrodes separated by a BN spacer. A magnetic 
field of up to 1 T was directed parallel to the 
length of the interelectrode gap.
Figure 4 shows the time-resolved discharge 
current and voltage for various modes of operation. 
In the absence of a magnetic field, the 8-12 A arc 
burns quietly inside the "cavity" formed in the 
molten slag. The arc voltage is low due to metal 
vapor in the cavity. Diffuse current transfer could 
also occur in this mode, given the proper slag 
thickness and temperature. At higher currents the 
slag evaporates and the arc burns openly, surrounded 
by a slag pool, at a low and stable voltage.
The magnetic field was observed to exert a 
moderate influence on the current through the slag. 
At increasing field strengths, the voltage increased 
as the current channel was deflected to the top of 
the slag layer, elongating the current path. The 
influence of the magnetic field on an open arc, 
though, is quite strong. At higher magnetic fields 
with the same current, the voltage increases several 
times and periodic fluctuations of both current and 
voltage appear. The frequency ranges of these 
fluctuations fell around 1 and around 100 Hz.
Molten slag frequently forms "bridges" which reduce 
the voltage and also suppress the current fluctua­
tions .

The arc originates as a breakdown through the 
slag-filled gap, then expands radially toward the 
walls of the enclosure. Slag and a jet of plasma 
erupt noisily from the opening in the enclosure.
The erratic nature of the arcing prevented any 
determination of current or magnetic field 
dependence. However, the heat flux to the 
electrodes increases greatly in the presence of a 
magnetic field, with about 70 percent of the total 
electrical energy transferred to the electrodes.
The anode side of the intercathode arc receives a 
larger fraction of the total heat.
Anodic erosion rates are significantly higher 
(Table 2) so that damage is concentrated on the 
anode edge. Platinum and tungsten-copper caps 
eroded somewhat less than the copper ones. The arc 
remains stationary for tens of seconds before chang­
ing positions. Therefore the electrode surfaces and 
anode edges wear rather uniformly, and only averaged 
and smoothened arc traces could be observed in post­
test study. For example, traces on the platinum 
surface are 200-400 mm wide and 10-20 mm deep.
Unslagged Intercathode Arcing
During the second series of experiments, arcs 
were monitored between open unslagged electrodes in 
the device pictured in Figure 5. Water-cooled 
copper electrodes could be positioned at various 
angles with respect to the imposed magnetic field, 
and they were adjusted so that the Lorenz force drew 
the arc away from the surface. The channel environ­
ment was simulated by spreading a cesium seeded 
flame from an oxy-acetylene burner over the elec­
trodes. Electrical and heat flux measurements were 
taken along with optical spectra of the discharge. 
Arc development and movement were recorded with a 
movie camera.
In the first group of tests, the electrodes 
were oriented parallel to the magnetic field.
Figure 6 shows the development of individual arcs: 
the arc first spreads radially from the edges of the 
gap and forms a semicircle in a well-defined verti­
cal plane. The arc roots slide over the elec­
trodes. Next, several concentric current channels 
may appear, each with its own electrode spots. In 
the final phase these channels disappear sequen­
tially, leaving a short-lived luminous cloud. This 
behavior did not vary substantially over the test 
ranges of 0.02-0.10 T and 10-30 A.
The movie camera was too slow (500 frames/sec, 
10-4 sec exposures) to capture all the details of 
the process, but instantaneous features can be 
observed from the frame sequences. Normally the 
current goes to zero and the voltage goes to its 
open circuit level when the new arc does not start 
before the original one extinguishes. In some 
cases, though, an arc will elongate to reach a high 
voltage, allowing a new arc to form while the 
original one still burns. These simultaneous arcs 
lead to higher Im-jn and lower Vmax. The 
lifetime of an individual arc is 5-10 msec, and the 
velocity of the arc column and arc spots is about 5 
m/sec. Particulates from the erosion process 
sometimes emerge from the gaps at a velocity of 
20-70 m/sec. The presence of hot combustion gases 
only decreases the amplitude of current pulsations 
due to an increase in Ira-jn and some increase in 
final arc length. This relative insensitivity to 
the combustion gases is to be expected because the

8.14-2


arc properties are defined by the metal vapor jets 
that emerge from the arc spots. These jets have a 
much higher conductivity than even seeded combustion 
products.
The erosion rate was comparable to the values 
for slagged electrodes. Again, this is to be 
expected since the erosion is primarily dependent on 
current and heat transfer in the arc rather than on 
the atmosphere and surface chemistry. The atmo­
sphere and chemistry, though, could influence the 
motion and residence time of the arc spots. As 
before, the anode erosion was higher than that of 
the cathode despite the symmetrical arc propagation.
Gradual changes in electrode orientation alter 
the arc behavior. Arc movement along, the gap pre­
dominates, while regular radial expansion subsides. 
Current and voltage pulsations become erratic and 
have smaller amplitudes than before. Movie frames 
shown in Figure 7 where the magnetic field is per­
pendicular to the top of the electrode (simulating a 
sidewall) reveal only one or two arcs existing 
simultaneously. Starting near the middle of the 
gap, the arc elongates irregularly and moves in the 
direction of the Lorentz force. The arc roots may 
move partly along the edges (especially of the 
anode) and partly across the top surface at about 
2-6 m/sec. The arc appears to be anchored by the 
anode spot position, with the cathode spot moving 
freely. It is unclear whether the arc spot motion 
is continuous or jumping. After the arc channel 
moves to its next position, luminous clouds produced 
either by plasma afterflow or continuing diffuse 
current remain visible for about 1 msec.*
The gas flow around the arc gap was visualized 
by adding sodium and strong turbulence was 
observed. The arc generated turbulent convection 
only moderately increases the heat flux to the 
electrodes despite a significant increase in the arc 
voltage. Most of the energy is dissipated to the 
surrounding atmosphere where it is moved away from 
the electrodes by "arc blow".
Erosion rates with the arc moving along the 
interelectrode gap are the lowest compared to an arc 
burning in the absence of a magnetic field. To 
supplement weight loss measurements, erosion rate 
comparisons were made by measuring the intensities 
of the copper emission lines. The Cul lines 
radiated by the stationary arc are an order of 
magnitude stronger than those radiated by moving 
arcs at the same current. Higher anode erosion 
rates could result from either higher heat fluxes or 
lower mobility of the anode spots. Arc spot 
mobility is a function of the surface conditions.
In these experiments the surface of the copper 
anodes was oxidized while the cathode surface 
appeared to be cleaned by sputtering. The low 
conductance oxide film on the anode can restrict 
mobility and increase the residence time of the 
anode spots by delaying the start of anode spot 
motion after breakdown. Alternatively, the gas flow 
field could blow the arc spot away from the cathode 
edge to reduce the erosion rate there.

* The role of the glow discharge/residual current in 
the arc reignition was studied quite recently in 
Ref. 10.

Comparing the bench test results with the MHD 
channel erosion data shows similar (0.5-1.0 ug/C) 
erosion rates, supporting the conclusion that rapid 
movement of the interelectrode arcs produces 
comparatively little erosion of the cathode and 
sidewall elements. The arcs are driven by Lorentz 
forces. On the sidewall these forces result from 
the main component of the magnetic field; at the 
cathode a small (0.01-0.10 T) magnetic field exists 
perpendicular to the wall, either as a component of 
the main field lines if the wall is tilted by as 
little as lu or as a spacial inhomogenity in the 
magnetic field.
MK VII SIDEWALL VOLTAGE DISTRIBUTION AND 
ARCING OBSERVATIONS

Sidewall Voltage Distribution
Forty pegs on the left sidewall of the Mk VII 
channel were instrumented with voltage transducers 
to resolve the axial (Vx) and transverse voltage 
distributions (Vy). It was observed that
• Vy "overshoots" are larger at the 
colder wall, especially for copper 
anodes, with both slagged and unslagged 
walls
• Large non-uniformities in Vx on the 
unslagged cathode wall "propagate" across 
the sidewall in decreasing magnitude 
until, at the mid-height of the channel, 
the axial voltages are nearly uniform. 
With a slag layer the same features are 
observed but they exhibit larger 
scatter. Close to the anode wall the 
axial voltage distribution becomes even 
more uniform.
A two-dimensional voltage distribution 
reconstructed from the axial traverses is shown in 
Figure 8 . Vertical voltage differences (DVy) are 
usually smaller than the corresponding axial voltage 
differences (DVX). The largest voltage differ­
ence, though, exists in the diagonal direction 
perpendicular to equipotentials, and may be even 
higher than the cathode voltage differences. These 
voltage jumps produce the peg erosion seen on the 
edges of the first two peg rows.
Formation of voltage distributions may be 
conveniently studied on both the cathode and anode 
walls by reversing the direction of the magnetic 
field. Voltage distribution near the "new" anode is 
very non-uniform immediately after the field 
reversal.
Voltage distributions were also measured in 
the central region of the bar sidewall. In these 
experiments the interbar voltages could be increased 
or lowered from their nominal values by connecting 
the appropriate bars to anodes or cathodes.
Correlating the erosion pattern and the 
voltage non-uniformity at the sidewall could predict 
erosion of differently designed sidewalls without 
long-duration testing. Since the cathode non­
uniformities only propagate a few rows along the 
sidewall, the sidewall lifetime could be lengthened 
by replacing these rows with non-conducting ceramic 
elements.

8.14-3


Sidewall Arcing

A special viewing port (Figure 9) was 
installed in the right sidewall to permit 
observation of arcing on the opposite wall. A 
2-in.-diameter, 2-ft-long electrically insulated 
tube passes through the magnet bore. The diameter 
of the tube limits the field of view to 4-6 sidewall 
bars or pegs. The tube is gas purged, and gas 
pressure pulses remove the slag and dust that 
collect in it.

Interoeg Arcing and Sidewall Arc Radiation

With no B-field, interpeg arcing induced by an 
external power supply was observed for both clean 
and slagged sidewalls. In seeded flow and unslagged 
walls, a single 5-20 A arc burns rather steadily at 
50-80 V. The arc is swept along by the flow (Figure 
10a), elongating until it breaks off and starts 
again at point A. With slag, the arc impedes the 
flow so that the slag separates around it and leaves 
a clean surface downstream (Figure 10b). About 60 
percent of the arc thermal energy or 100 to 200 W 
goes to the electrode, which is sufficient to 
evaporate approximately 0.5 g/sec of molten slag.
At a typical slag flow velocity of 2 cm/sec, this 
rate of evaporation will clear a 2 mm x 5 mm strip.
Optical spectra of sidewall arc radiation were 
taken (Figure 11) which revealed that, in addition 
to radiation from the hot gas flow, strong lines of 
copper (Cul) and calcium (Cal and Call) are 
present. The copper originates from peg erosion 
while the calcium appears from the slag vapors. The 
intensity ratios of the copper lines (Cu I 5105, Cu 
I 5153, and Cu I 5218) were used to derive the arc 
column temperature. Using known transition proba­
bilities, the temperature was calculated as T = 6030 
± 200 K. This temperature was comparable to that of 
an air-burning arc. In addition, comparison of the 
radiation from an arc sustained by an external 
source and from a high cathode open gap arc in a 
magnetic field could be used to evaluate the Hall 
arc current, which is normally difficult to measure 
directly.
Interbar Arcing
Interbar voltages were measured and the arcing 
pattern was simultaneously photographed with a 
200-mm lens for the bars seen through the optical 
window (31M, 31B, 32M, and 32B). Optical spectra 
were also taken with a fiberoptics-connected 
spectrometer. No arcing was observed under normal 
operation when DV, measured between 31H and 32B, was 
lower than 50 V. When 0V was increased above 50 to 
65 V by applying an external dc voltage or by 
connecting bars to cathodes, arcing took place if 
the seeded gas conductivity exceeded 3 mho/m. Three 
to six arcs with currents of 2-3 A each usually 
occurred on unslagged bars. Sometimes these arcs 
suddenly merged into one large arc with a power 
supply limited current of 10-20 A. When DV crossed 
the threshold voltage in slagged flow, a more stable 
5-10 A arc formed. In some cases, though, a current 
up to 10 A could flow without forming an observable 
arc. It is possible that an arc was indeed present 
but was running within the slag layer.
Motion pictures taken under the conditions 
indicated in Figures 17 and 18 prompted the 
following observations and measurements:

• Under normal operation, the maximum 
''diagonal" voltage (30 V < AV<j < 50 V) 
is a factor of 1.2 to 1.5 times DVX but 
is not high enough for arc formation. 
Increasing DV^ to 60-70 V with an 
external power supply, or by connecting 
to certain electrodes can induce arcing, 
presumably by increasing the total or 
local Hall voltage.
• Above the voltage threshold, strong arc 
"pulses" form every 0.05-0.25 second on 
unslagged surfaces, lasting for 0 .1-0.2 
second. The current in these interbar 
arcs start as 0.5-2 A in the discharge 
and then increases to over 10 A for the 
strong arc in 0.05-0.01 second.
• Several small arc spots or 1 to 2 large 
spots exist permanently and move slowly 
(a few cm/sec) over the liquid slag 
surface. The spot polarity is difficult 
to identify, as is the position of the 
"opposite" arc root. It is not clear if 
these arcs originate from the neighboring 
wall element or if they run between the 
slag surface and the core plasma, where 
diffuse current transfer takes place. It 
is impossible to distinguish the 
"Faraday" and "Hall" arcs.
• More distinct arcs were observed when the 
magnetic field was reversed. These arcs 
are localized and move rapidly between 
the bars along the same diagonal where 
the highest voltage occurs.
• Bar edge erosion was evident in post-test 
inspection. It is believed that only 
arcs with roots directly attached to the 
metal, especially short 
"surface-to-surface" interelement arcs, 
cause significant damage while arcs 
rooted on the slag surface do not cause 
erosion.
ANALYTICAL ESTIMATE OF ARCING EROSION
In this section we calculate the erosion of 
electrode material due to the heat load imposed at 
the foot of either a moving or stationary arc. The 
heat load can be calculated from the electrical 
power dissipated at the arc root. This power is 
equal to the near electrode arc voltage drop times 
the arc current. For the case of the intercathode 
high gap arc, the voltage drop is related to the 
local gap properties. Local gap properties are 
associated with the physical state of the gap and 
include insulator width, slag thickness, slag 
chemistry, and wall temperature, among others. On 
the other hand, the currents flowing across the 
intercathode high gap arcs are strong functions of 
the overall generator operating parameters, such as 
channel loading, average plasma conductivity, and 
magnetic field strength. The voltage is believed 
not to scale with generator size, while the 
intercathode gap current will increase with 
generator size.
The anodic and cathodic drops of the 
intercathode high gap are assumed in the present 
analysis to be approximately 1/3 of the total high 
gap voltage (the other 1/3 consumed in the arc

8.14r4


column). So that for a 75V gap each drop amounts to 
25V. We have also estimated the cathode wall axial 
current leakage to be about 20A for the AVCO MkVI 
generator. So we can use 500W as a typical number 
for the heat load of these intercathode high gap arc 
roots. The arc is assumed to be described by a 
2-dimensional gaussian distribution of heat flux q 
(W/m2) with a total arc heat load 0 (W) using the 
following equations:

where qmax is the maximum heat flux at the arc 
center and Rarc = k^ ^ 2 is the characteristic 
arc radius. Assuming that the heat load of this arc 
is imposed on a semi-infinite electrode, approxi­
mating that the depth of the electrode in the Z 
direction is much larger than Rarc, the time 
dependent temperature distribution may be 
found.n>12 If the arc is moving over the 
electrode surface at velocity V, the temperature at 
the center of the moving arc (r=0 ) as a function of 
time and depth coordinate (Zm) in the moving frame 
of reference can be expressed as:

- » V ' )
2Q p e 4at' 4T akc ) L
(4ir)3/2k /T * ° v/t7
(“ c * *') (3)

denoting the thermal conductivity and diffusivity of 
the electrode material as k and a, respectively.
The erosion rate of a moving arc G (kg/sec) can then 
be stated as the simple relation:

G =

pelec V

Z

evap
7^

(4)

where pelec ts the electrode material density and 
Zevap the depth in the electrode at which the 
temperature reaches the evaporation temperature of 
the electrode material. This erosion rate equation 
can be substituted into the temperature equation at 
T=TeVap- However, for quasi-steady operation 
(t->«) it is also necessary to subtract the power 
required to melt (AHmeit) and vaporize (AHevap) 
electrode material due to the arc heat load Q. 
Therefore the following integral equation is derived 
which can be used to find the erosion rate G as a 
function of the electrode properties, arc velocity, 
arc radius, and arc heat load:

Note that the unknown G appears both inside 
and outside the integral. This solution, though, 
breaks down at small velocities where the erosion 
rate, defined in Eq. 4, approaches zero. Since 
actual erosion rates for stationary arcs are much 
larger than those for large arcs, an alternate 
solution must be obtained for the motionless arc. 
Therefore the stationary arc erosion rate is defined 
as:
p el, ec dZ evap
Gs = n ^ ~ ~ ^ t (6

The erosion rate now depends on the time 
derivative of the evaporation depth Zevap 
evaluated at time tevap, which is the time needed 
for the electrode surface under the stationary arc 
to reach the evaporation point. Inserting this new 
equation into the previous temperature equation with 
V=0, results in the following integro-differential 
equation for the stationary arc:

The evaporation time is simple to obtain in 
closed form by setting Zevap=dZevap/dt=0 and 
integrating the previous equation. Both equations 
were also solved numerically over a range of arc 
radii for a copper electrode and an arc heat load of 
500 W. A "blended" solution for G(V,Rarc) has 
been constructed using the stationary erosion rate 
at small velocities and the moving arc solution for 
medium to large arc velocities. The results are 
shown in Figure 14 for an arc radius of 0.2 mm.
From the solution it was found that there exists for 
every arc radius a critical arc velocity, denoted as 
V*. above which no erosion occurs. For the 0.2 mm 
arc investigated, this critical velocity is 0.8 
m/sec.

A characteristic erosion rate has been defined 
as the erosion rate for an arc velocity that is half 
of the critical velocity; that is, G*=G(V*/2). For 
the test case shown in Figure 14, G*=2.5 mg/sec.
The functional dependence of G(V) can be investi­
gated for all Rarc once the arc velocity is 
nondimensionalized by V* and the erosion rate is 
nondimensionalized by G*. The curves of V*(Rarc) 
and G*(Rarc) in Figure 15 show that both critical 
velocity and characteristic erosion decrease with

8.14-5


arc radius. In addition, a critical arc radius, 
Rarc*, exists beyond which no erosion occurs, even 
for a stationary arc. This critical radius is 
calculated as .25 mm for 500 W arcs on copper 
electrodes.

A simplified set of equations are presented to 
simulate the erosion rate for 500 W copper arcs as a 
function of the radius:

where G* is in mg/sec and V* is in m/sec. A 
3-dimensional plot of G as a function of arc 
velocity and arc radius to critical radius ratio, 
constructed from the simplified equations, is shown 
in Figure 16. A similar 3-D description of arcing 
erosion might be developed by consolidating the 
effect of electrode material and arc heat load into 
the critical arc radius.

Figure 16 shows the region for the arc radius 
very cose to the critical radius. This was done 
since typical characteristic erosion rates for 20A 
arcs from the model's results are around 500 
ug/coulomb (at Rar-c/Rarc ~0 .5). Measured 
levels for arcing erosion in bench experiments yield 
much smaller numbers ~ 2 *jg/coul. This rate can be 
attained by either of 2 situations: a) motionless
arcs with radius very close to the critical radius, 
which is the case described in Fig. 21, b) arcs of 
arbitrary radius (smaller than Rarc) which move 
at velocities very close to the arc critical 
velocity. Of course the second criterion can be 
explained by arcs which are most of the time mobile 
with arbitrarily large velocities (larger than 
V*), but for a small fraction of their time are 
stationary, and erode the electrode at this small 
time fraction. In this case it would mean that 
typically arcs are stationary less than 1 percent of 
the time.
DISCUSSION OF CATHODIC ARCING FEATURES
Although arcing takes place on both the 
cathode and anode walls, erosion of the anode wall 
is less severe since the lower interelectrode 
voltage “spikes" infrequently produce arcing. Even 
if arcing does occur, proper design of the inter­
electrode space can limit the damage. Therefore it 
is more crucial to develop a broad understanding of 
"cathodic" arcing, including near-cathode sidewall 
elements where the voltage distribution and arcing 
breakdown conditions are similar to those of the 
cathode. This similarity arises from both the 
sidewal1/cathode electrical link and the formation 
of a potassium sub-layer over the sidewall following 
this link. Although propagation of the sidewall arc 
in the boundary layer and the velocity of the arc 
root may be different from those at the cathode, 
sidewall erosion is probably not qualitatively 
different from cathode erosion. The ability of the 
“finer" sidewall segmentation to split leakage 
current into multiple smaller arcs may be offset by 
these smaller elements being more susceptible to 
damage.

Figure 17 illustrates the formation of charac­
teristic "cathode” voltage patterns and arcing for a 
10 electrode wall segment. The voltage over the 
segment depends on the overall channel conditions, 
so it was necessary to assume some typical volt­
ages: 80 V arcing breakdown voltage, 70 V
steady-state arc voltage, and 1 V voltage drop 
across a shorted gap. The latter voltage was 
selected for illustrative purposes since the actual 
voltage drop is quite small. The voltage distri­
bution and arcing sequence is thus:
1. Initially the slag layer has uniform 
resistance so that the gap voltages are all 
equal.
2. The voltage is redistributed by the random 
formation of the potassium-rich slag layer, 
which changes selective gap resistances.
3. As this redistribution continues, most gap 
resistances decrease with the available 
voltage “concentrating" over the few 
"unshorted" gaps.
4. As gap if 2 gradually shorts, the voltage at 
gap i f ! reaches breakdown level.
5. An arc forms at gap if7 and runs along the
gap length, carrying 70 V and a current which, 
is a function of the overall channel condi­
tions. The arc removes the potassium sub­
layer (one traverse of a 100 to 500 W arc is 
sufficient), but liquid slag continues to flow 
over the gap, except near the arc where arc 
jetting blows the slag away. The liquid slag 
across the gap has a relatively high resist­
ance and therefore does not short the gap.
6 . The arc extinguishes but the gap still remains 
highly resistive. It is unclear whether the 
gap voltage then remains the same or decreases.
7. Gap if2 and gap i f l are now both highly 
resistant but "arc-less" and the first one to 
reach breakdown voltage, in this case gap
#2, arcs. Thus the voltage in gap i f l 
drops.
8 . Gap 1f2 arcs for a period of time.
9. The arc across gap if2 disappears so that gap 
#2 competes with the gap with the “next 
highest resistance", in this case gap #9.
10. Gap #2 wins again. After a new breakdown, 
the arc on gap #2 re-establishes.
Some features of this process merit further 
comments:
S i n g l e vs. M u l t i p l e A r c s
The arc mode depends on the shape of the V-I 
characteristics. In most cases the "minimum 
voltage" principle is valid for arc discharges and 
implies that the merger of small arcs should take 
place when operating on the falling branch of the 
V-I characteristic and not on the rising branch.
The branch on which the arc operates is dependent on 
the operating conditions as follows:

8.14-6


Falling Branch

Free-burning arc 
High concentration of 
metal vapors in arc 
channel
Strong conductivity 
rise with temperature

Rising Branch

Arc channel 
diameter limited 
by walls 
Cold gas flow 
Small inter­
electrode distance 
Weak conductivity 
rise with 
temperature
Consequently, arcs with high current (over a 
few A) that evaporate electrode material, slag, 
and/or seed deposits belong to the first category 
and tend to run "solo". In contrast, low current 
"non-evaporating" arcs whose small diameter is 
controlled by the "cold"gas flow in the boundary 
layer belong to the second category and may exist as 
a several-member "family". These arcs include those 
between the core plasma flow and the electrode 
surfaces.

Several strong arcs may coexist, but they must 
have separate power supplies to keep their roots 
electrically isolated in order to maintain them 
simultaneously.
A r c M o v e m e n t
Arc movement over an electrode surface is a 
function of the magnetic field (strength and 
direction), the electrode material properties which 
control the surface temperature, and the presence of 
an insulating oxide layer, a conductive seed/- 
potassium layer, and the slag. To a lesser extent, 
the arc movement is also dependent on the tempera­
ture and electrical conductivity of the gas boundary 
layer. Arc velocity over very clean copper elec­
trodes has been defined in Ref. 9 as V = 5 
(I/d)0.4.

High current "evaporating" arcs tend to stay a 
site which is hot or is covered with a conductive 
layer or to move along the gap "in search of" 
potassium deposits. These arcs tend to evaporate as 
much low-ionization potential material as possible 
into their current channels to lower their resis­
tances. Low current arcs do not incorporate 
electrode material and are therefore less surface 
dependent and more mobile. Since electromagnetic 
force is current dependent, the correlation of 
actual arc velocity versus current may be much more 
complicated.
A r c i n g E r o s i o n
Bench tests indicate that the erosion rate for 
a typical 20 A moving arc is on the order of 2 
yd'/C, which on the average is 0.05 mg/sec.
Assuming that the removal of 10 g copper can be 
tolerated, the electrode would have a lifetime on 
the order of 100 hr at this erosion rate. This 
prediction is somewhat pessimistic compared to 
better results obtained in long duration channel 
tests. Actual arcing erosion may also be reduced by 
several factors:
• The open gap moves along the channel
• The effective duration of the arc is 
reduced by spending part of the time 
transferring current in the diffuse mode.

• Some of the calculated leakage current 
actually flows without damage into the 
liquid slag and the boundary layer rather 
than across the electrode gap. A diagram 
of such behavior, showing the current 
density in the arcing cross-section of an 
open gap and in a shorted gap, is shown 
in Figure 18.

A r c E x t i n g u i s h i n g
Bench experiments indicate that an arc is 
blown into cold surrounding gas, where it 
disappears, if the available voltage cannot support 
a certain arc length. Same should be true for the 
"cathodic" MHD channel arc (except the arc column 
diffuses reaching the core flow). It can be 
speculated that high current arcs controlled by 
evaporating electrode material in a narrow gap may 
behave differently. These very short arc columns 
will not be "blown" away by the magnetic field 
because maintaining the arc column within a con­
ductive pocket of copper vapor is energetically 
advantageous. The standing long-living high-current 
arc, when formed, should be a major erosion factor.

" A r c L e s s " O p e n G a p s
While arcing is the predominant mechanism for 
opening a gap, some initial part of this process is 
achieved with a diffuse current. Since approxi­
mately 1 J/cm is required to remove 0.2 mm of a 
conductive slag sub-layer from a gap, the entire gap 
would be cleaned by a diffuse current in about 100 
msec. The cleaning process is accelerated after the 
arc is formed due to the instability/contraction of 
the slag current. Even after the arc is extin­
guished by magnetic field "blowing" and/or by the 
voltage drop associated with a potassium deposit, 
the gap may maintain its relatively high voltage and 
again conduct high current in the diffuse mode for 
some time. The characteristic time for a gap to 
open is usually about 1 minute, while the time 
required to form a potassium deposit sufficient to 
extinguish the arc is only a few seconds. Thus an 
interplay between the potassium deposit and diffuse 
current arcing processes takes place in an open 
gap. Direct observations of arcing and time- 
resolved voltage measurements are needed to 
proportionate arc current versus diffuse current 
transfer modes.*

*This work was sponsored by the U.S. Department of 
Energy under Contract Ho. DE-AC22-87PC90274, Sub­
contract No. CX5136D58S and Contract No. 
DE-AC22-84PC70507.

8.14-7


+

Fig. 1 Sketch of the Interelectrode Arcing Test Rig

TABLE 2 EROSION OF METAL ELECTRODES BY ARC DISCHARGE 
IN MAGNETIC FIELD

Experimental Conditions

Erosion Rate, yg/Coulomb 
Anode Cathode

B parallel to gap length
0.02 < B < 0.1T 
1 = 20A

Cu 2 Cu - 0.5

B perpendicular to gap length 
0.01 < B < 0.02T Cu 0.8 Cu - 0.3
I - 20-30A W/Cu 0.5
8 = 0 
I = 25A Cu 5 Cu 2

.| l ll l l l l l l |l

Fig. 3 Arcing Cuts of the Interelectrode BN 
Insulator (Photo 5431-1)
a) 1.7 mm Thickness, without Cavity
b) 1.7 mm Thickness, with Cavity
c) 4.1 mm Thickness, without Cavity
d) 4.1 mm Thickness, with Cavity

Fig. 2 Current and Voltage Records of
Interelectrode Arcing, V0 - 250 V, B ^ 
1.35; 1.7 mm, BN Insulator
a) Electrodes without Cavity
b) Electrodes with Cavity, Alternate Arc 
Ignition

TABLE 1 CHARACTERISTICS OF ARCING BREAKDOWN OF
INTERELECTRODE INSULATORS IN A MAGNETIC FIELD

INSULATOR 
THICKNESS 
(GAP) m

MAGNETIC
FIELD
STRENGTH
T

CURRENT
A

POWER
kW

ENERGY
kJ

POWER/
GAP
W/nrni

ENERGY 
MASS LOSS 
J/mg

0.95 BN 1.3 21 1.7 6 1800 165
1.75 1.3 23 1,85 11 1050 122
1.75 1.3 35 2,8 15 1600 162
1.70 1.45 23 1,9 10 1100 115
1.70 0.8 23 1,7 9 1000 90
4.1 1.3 36 4,2 19 1020 100
4.8 1.3 36 4,3 32 900 94
4.0 S13N4 1.3 23 2.4 10 600 52
6.5 1.3 36 4,8 18 740 55
10.8 1.3 36 4,0 22 370 46

0- oi___lJ__I___I___ ... I___I__ 1 . .
O f l 2 3 4 5 6 7
TIME . MIN
BREAKDOWN

Fig. 4 Arcing Modes in the Presence of Slag
1 Arc Burns Inside the Slag Cavity
2 Open Arc "Detached" by Magnetic Field
3 Current Through a Slag "Bridge"
4 Arc "Detached" by Magnetic Field

8.14-8


LIGHT GUIDE TO SPECTROMETER

BREAKDOWN
DEVELOPMENT

REMOVABLE BN 
SLAG RETAINER

Fig. 5 Sketch of the InterelecErode Arcing Test 
Set-up II, Unsiagged Conditions

t o
Fig. 6 Typical Sequence of Events for
Interelectrode Arcing in a Magnetic field 
Parallel to the Gap. I - 20A, B - 0.05T, 
500 frames/sec, 10~4 Sec exposure

- 90v — 40v + 5 v + 5 0 v

Fig. 8 Typical Voltage Distribution Map Over the 
Mk VII Sidewall (Near Cathode)

QUARTZ

Fig. 9 Design of the Sidewall Optical Port

A SLAG

>==0

L9796

Fig. 7 Sequence of Events for Interelectrode
Arcing in a Magnetic Field Perpendicular to 
the Electrode Surface. I - 30A, BN - 
0.021, 500 frames/sec, 10“^ sec exposure

A) B)
Fig. 10 Patterns of Sidewall Arc Movement lai and 
Slag Melting (b)

8.14-9


Cal Cul Fol Na
4226 5105 5242
5153 5250
5218

Fig. 11 Spectra of Plasma in Mk VIT Extension 
Section
a) Without Ash Injection
b) With Ash Injection and Slag Layer Tormed
c) With Sidewall Arcing

BURNER TIME (MINS)

Fig. 12 Real Time Plot of the Interbar (31M-32B) 
Voltage. 1,2,4,6 - arcing; 3,4 - no 
arcing 5 - strong arcing

© © <D

TYPICAL BAR SIDEWALL VOLTAGE DISTRIBUTIONS

Fig. 13 Voltage Distribution Pattern Corresponding 
to Selected Burner Times from Fig. 17

Fig. 14 ARC Erosion vs. Arc Velocity
Rare = 0.2 mm, Qarc - 500 W, Cu Electrode

Fig. 15 Arc Critical Velocity and Characteristic 
Erosion vs. Radius (Qarc = 500 W, Cu 
electrode)

Fig. 16 Arc Erosion vs. Radius and Velocity
Qarc = 500 W, Cu Electrode, Rare* - 0.25 mm

8.14-10


T ime, au References
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10

10 20 5 5 5 5 20 5 15 10

5 30 1 1 1 1 SO 1 5 5

l 12 1 1 1 i 80 L 1 i
1 22 I 1 1 1 rArc

\ 1 1
70

____ A_ 42 O - J 1 50 1 1 1

1 82 1 1 1 1 10 1 1 1

____ i _

Arc
r \ 1 i '•° i '2 1
/o
l 42 1 i 1 1 30 1
i rArc

\ 1 2g_ 1 1 1 i 1

—•--- [

Fig. 17 Example of Hypothetical Voltage
Redistribution Sequence Over 10 gap 
Cathode Wall Segment

Fig. 18 Hypothetical Current Density Distributions 
Intercathode Gaps

1. Pian, C.C.P., Petty, S.W., and McClaine, 
A.W., "Experimental Investigation of 
Factors Affecting the Cathode Wall Slag 
Layer Resegmentation Frequency," 
Proceedings of the 26th Symposium on the 
Engineering Aspects of MHD, Nashville,
TN, June 20-22, 1988.

2. Pian, C.C.P., Sadovnik, I., Petty, S.W., 
and McClaine, A.W., "Voltage-Current 
Charcteristics of the Insulator Gaps in a 
Slagging MHD Generator," Proceedings of 
the 26th Symposium on the Engineering 
Aspects of MHD, Nashville, TN, June 
20-22, 1988.
3. Cott, D.W., “Slag Behavior in MHD 
Generators: Physical Phenomena and 
Engineering Consequences," Proceedings of 
the 26th Symposium on the Engineering 
Aspects of MHD, Nashville, TN, June 
20-22, 1988.

4. Avco Research Laboratory, Inc., “MHD 
Channel Development," Quarterly Progress 
Report, Contract No. DE-AC22-84PC70607, 
July 1986.

5. Podmoshenky, I.V., et al., “High 
Temperatures, 6 , 1130, 1968.

6 . Unkel, W. and Blackman, L., Journal of 
Energy, 7, 272, 1983.

7. Hruby, V.J. and Weiss, P., "Experimental 
Investigations of the Fault Power in a 
Segmented MHD Generator," 19th Symposium 
on Engineering Aspects of MHD, Tullahoma, 
June 1981.

8 . Bashilov, V.A., Makarov, Y.V. and 
Sorokin, V.Y., "Study of Arc-Quenchers 
for MHD Generator Anode Wall," 19th 
Symposium on Engineering Aspects of MHD, 
Tullahoma, June 1981.
9. Guile, A.E. and Hitchcock, J. Phys. D: 
Appl. Phys., Vol. 7, 597, (1974).

10. K. Nobata and M. Kurokawa, Japanese 
Journal of Applied Physics, Vol. 28, 501, 
1989.

11. N. Rykalin, A. Uglov, A. Kokora, "Laser 
Machining and Welding", Mir Publishers, 
1978.

12. I.I. Beilis, "Thermal Conditions for the 
Metal Framework of a Combined MHDG 
Electrode in a Contracted Discharge",
High Temperature Physics, Vol. 24, 1173, 
1986.

8.14-11